framework. There is clear progress in the implementation of AAP within IOM, but any claim of "AAP mainstreaming" within the Organization cannot be reasonably demonstrated.

- At a decentralized level, there are examples of IOM being able to set up articulated systems and initiatives that promote AAP, with tangible effects on operations. However, sustaining and scaling up these initiatives is challenging. AAP implementation at the level of IOM country offices is predominantly undertaken in the context of specific projects or thematic areas. This may often lead to a "fragmented approach" where solutions and activities implemented in one area are not necessarily replicated or extended to other relevant ones. The case of IOM Ethiopia stood out as an important attempt at "institutionalising" AAP in the country office structure, as well as devising a mechanism to fund AAP activities from all ongoing projects in the mission.
- There are known gaps that reduce the effectiveness and efficiency of activities promoting AAP at a decentralized level. These include a lack of full integration of AAP into the IOM project cycle; a lack of standard solutions and technical resources for the development and management of complaint and feedback mechanism (CFM) systems; a lack of technical resources and support to make full use of data gathered from affected people; and, finally, a lack of capacity to engage with other actors to promote "collective accountability".

In conclusion, the evaluation largely confirms the findings from the 2023 MOPAN assessment, while also drawing a more nuanced and detailed picture of how IOM is pursuing its institutional commitments regarding AAP. Nine recommendations are put forward for IOM senior management and for the AAP team, to address the gaps identified:

1. Clarify that the scope and applicability of AAP extends beyond emergency response operations, reinforcing also the message on the mandatory nature of $\mathrm{IN} / 285$.
2. Develop an operational medium- to longer-term strategy for AAP, to be negotiated at the highest leadership level, with a three-year plan connected to a funding strategy.
3. In conjunction with Recommendation 2 (develop an AAP strategy), develop a theory of change and a dedicated monitoring and evaluation framework for AAP.
4. Strengthen central AAP functions, ensuring that the size of the AAP unit in IOM Headquarters becomes adequate to meet AAP strategic objectives and that there is capacity to proactively support country offices to structure their approach to AAP implementation.
5. Support country offices in developing office-wide approaches to AAP implementation and funding, reducing fragmentation.
6. Increase the visibility of AAP activities, both internally and externally, on the basis of a clear visibility and knowledge management plan.