Not all informants consulted in IOM Türkiye were aware that IN/285 is mandatory in the Organization, with some reducing AAP to the mere management of CFMs. As with other crosscutting internal policies, the adoption and coherent management of AAP was perceived as challenging. In addition to the fragmentation mentioned above, informants noted as challenging the lack of global guidance concerning CFMs, including on the legal and practical aspects of their operation and data management and usage. At a more general level, informants identified the "projectized" nature of the IOM funding structure, and the insufficient availability of resources for mainstreaming policies (never mind the resources to establish and manage systems that work across the Organization), as a fundamental challenge.

In some ways, IOM Türkiye reflected the challenges and overall situation regarding AAP in IOM Headquarters, where the ongoing restructuring and unclear repositioning of the AAP portfolio were causing uncertainty and limiting coordination and implementation capacity around these matters. The lack of a comprehensive response to AAP was felt against the backdrop of a growing awareness of this framework and its relevance, although some informants doubted whether the level of awareness of the senior management of IOM Türkiye on global AAP policy was adequate.

Collaboration on AAP between IOM and other organizations was observed to be limited, as IOM was perceived as working more autonomously than other United Nations agencies. The awareness of governmental partners of AAP was not assessed specifically, but it was observed that CFMs and community engagement initiatives led by local government agencies were in place; there was, however, no clear connection between these initiatives and the IOM ones. Some informants noted that, initially, government agencies did not seem to understand the value of engaging with communities, but that their attitude changed after activities in community spaces were completed and started bearing fruits.

##### Effectiveness  ... page 56

As already described, at the time of this evaluation, there was a monitoring and evaluation system in place for cross-border operations in IOM Türkiye, as many activities were carried out by implementing partners and not directly by IOM. Some informants perceived this system as costly and of uncommon scale for IOM standards. Monitoring and evaluation data and findings, including from the CFM, were recognized as useful to inform adjustments to programming, but not necessarily sufficient to inform strategic decisions or organizational change in a broader sense. Some informants also perceived that the data gathered were not being fully utilized.

The multilingual hotline deployed for the refugee response programme was relatively new, and potential users were being targeted by communications to inform them of this service. Some informants mentioned that complaints and concerns were often received by field staff directly rather than through dedicated communication channels, explaining that this was happening because IOM staff were generally perceived by beneficiaries as open and supportive. Some challenges with the management of the CFM were mentioned, often in relation to translating feedback into concrete adjustments or learning. In the words of one survey respondent from Türkiye, "Complaint and feedback mechanism remain a challenge on how to use these successfully."