locations, people do not want to talk - they think they have said enough. Many organizations are asking [the same] questions - it is discouraging").

Impact and Sustainability
No clear sign of broad impacts stemming from AAP activities could be identified, possibly due to the way that AAP in IOM Türkiye was siloed within specific programmes, and that its purpose was understood to be more about informing project-level adaptations than supporting a broader strategy entailing cultural or organizational change across the country office. Assessing the degree to which AAP activities are promoting the empowerment of affected persons is difficult. One survey respondent from IOM Türkiye stated, "There is experience of collecting feedback, but how to evaluate impact is something we have to work on." Another stakeholder reported how too much surveying may be detrimental to empowerment, as too much energy is devoted to asking instead of emphasizing how communities can organize themselves and address their needs. The effort put into collecting data was also seen at times as disproportionate vis-à-vis the likelihood this would have triggered change.

The "projectized" funding structure of the Organization, together with a prevailing culture where "aid" delivery is central, but less consideration is given to learning and the long-term sustainability of the interventions undertaken, are seen as posing fundamental obstacles to AAP mainstreaming. One survey respondent from IOM Türkiye stated that "programmes usually are defensive or dismissive when reacting to beneficiary feedback. Lack of resources for AAP units makes it difficult to follow up on feedback and causes a lack of credibility of the whole function." This points at the need for more structural investment in AAP, with the full and continued support of IOM Türkiye's leadership.

The experience of community-led projects was seen by one of the interviewees in Gaziantep as highly relevant to AAP and worthy of careful evaluation or even impact assessment, primarily to better understand issues around participation and community empowerment. There is growing awareness in the humanitarian sector of the importance of empowering local communities to be more resilient to future shocks, and this is a further reason why AAP initiatives like community-led projects are so important. ${ }^{32}$ The development of a communityled project involves six steps: consultation (community consultation and FGD, to understand the dynamics of the communities); design (the communities' and stakeholders' contributions); implementation (to ensure that activities are participatory); monitoring (using quantitative and qualitative data); handover (to the community group or government); and evaluation (to assess the results and use them to enhance community impact). Examples of community-led projects mentioned by informants include building safety areas for children, developing communal spaces such as communal tents, and breast cancer awareness activities.

In its engagement with community-led projects, IOM is identifying community projects and conducting a neighbourhood profile. IOM is setting up community groups and trying to identify their needs (for example, a request for the refurbishment of a bread-making company), making links and referrals to other areas (such as health or education), and giving assistance in areas

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{32}$ See the Flagship Initiative by OCHA.