##### Effectiveness  ... page 48

Informants consulted for this case study largely perceived that affected communities are becoming increasingly aware of their rights and entitlements, leading to an increase in complaints and to the proactive provision of feedback. The effectiveness of the AAP Framework was evident, with instances of reports of aid diversion. In response, The IOM MEAL team investigate and implement corrective measures, including, as a last resort, the temporary suspension of aid distribution. The application of AAP to aid distribution entails the involvement of community representatives in the targeting and selection of beneficiaries, as well as the active engagement of community committees in the operationalization of CFMs.

The CFM reporting system utilized in camp settings was seen as effective for documenting complaints and queries from IDPs, assigning a unique number to each case for follow-up. Reports are centrally managed, analysed and shared with internal units and external partners for resolution. SMS text messaging was seen to be effective in informing beneficiaries about their entitlements. ${ }^{28}$

Resort to hotline services has been growing, with utilization peaks reached during needs assessments, large-scale awareness campaigns, as well as during the onset of crises that create displacement. The hotline is a popular channel for voicing complaints, particularly for addressing sensitive issues like aid diversion, as it is easier for a caller to remain anonymous. The hotline data are also managed using a complaint-handling flow process that aligns with internal and IAAWG CFM guidance.

Some challenges were mentioned concerning the effectiveness of hotline services. These include the fact that operators may not be familiar with all IOM interventions in the country (or those of other humanitarian actors), and that some reports inevitably go beyond the scope and reach of IOM operations. Additionally, phone network disruptions may make hotline services inaccessible, limiting the effectiveness of this channel in crisis situations where disruptions tend to be severe and protracted. Nevertheless, according to IOM Ethiopia's complaints and feedback overview of January-June 2023, 73 per cent of complaints and feedback were addressed in a timely manner.

Repeated complaints in IDP camps (for example, those in Tigray) on issues such as shelter maintenance, electricity and medical coverage for chronic illness (people with advanced age) to IOM and other partner organizations lead to beneficiary frustration. While some dissatisfaction stems from gaps between available support and community needs, other dissatisfaction arises from misconceptions about aid eligibility and unrealistic expectations. The comprehensive involvement of all partners, together with detailed information sharing regarding the project scope and capacity, were deemed as essential to address diverse needs comprehensively and efficiently.

An assessment of satisfaction with AAP mechanisms is integrated into post-distribution monitoring surveys. In the first half of 2024, 98 per cent of respondents ( $\mathrm{N}=2271$ ) reported

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{28}$ The Socio-economic Reintegration of Ex-combatants (SERE) project piloted text messaging before the hotline was established in 2021. During this pilot phase, the hotline operation was restricted to recording messages.