relative isolation, most often at the level of single projects, with rare instances where efforts were coordinated to devise solutions applicable to entire country offices. ${ }^{17}$

The predominant perception is that CFM development and management is an area of AAP that is particularly unstructured and lacking guidance, and one where significant duplication of effort may be taking place. Different examples of CFM systems of varying complexity and functions were gathered, always in the context of autonomous development. These narrations sometimes pointed at the significant upfront costs of setting up these systems, at how IOM may be incurring these costs multiple times across the different autonomous initiatives, and how these costs remain to date an insurmountable barrier for some smaller projects or country offices to set up "modern" solutions.
"IOM needs a systematic approach and structure for CFMs at field offices. Now there are separate, messy systems different across every [country office] and confusion on whether MEAL, Communications, or other function should manage them; confusion on how to use the feedback into and out of the country office and no systematic system to track followups."

IOM staff.

While flexibility and autonomy may promote innovation and better adaptation to different contexts, no informant elaborated on or suggested that a structured initiative is in place to map CFM solutions in the Organization, to identify scalable ones, or to identify and disseminate good practice in general. The development of a "standard CFM system" was sometimes mentioned as needed, although with some caveats and scepticism on the possibility of this solution being available in the short or medium term, with the suggestion that the Organization could look also at what other organizations have developed.

Another common theme in the responses concerning CFMs was the limited capacity to consolidate CFM data and produce analyses with uses that go beyond the reporting requirements of the specific project that funded the CFM. Most informants felt that data gathered through CFMs were not being fully utilized due to limited incentives or resources to go beyond the reporting requirements, which are very often based on simplistic indicators that merely count the number of complaints received and responded to, without looking at how those complaints are addressed. ${ }^{18}$

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{17}$ Case studies 1 and 2 provide some details on the CFM systems in use in IOM Türkiye and IOM Ethiopia, and how their use may be limited to specific units or projects within the respective country offices. IOM Sudan was indicated by one informant as having developed a comprehensive CFM system, inclusive also of follow-up monitoring functionalities, although this solution could not be reviewed as part of this evaluation.
    ${ }^{18}$ The points raised in this paragraph should be read in conjunction with Finding 2.2 on collective accountability.