Informants confirmed that the development of the AAP Framework did not significantly involve Member States. The perspectives of Member States were not sufficiently explored for this evaluation to determine if alignment exists or not. However, IOM informants reported that a total of 225 affected persons, from different countries, participated in the consultation phase of the AAP Framework, prior to its piloting in 2018.

IOM staff noted during interviews and in the survey that local communities may not always recognize the advantages of feedback mechanisms, or that there may be some cultural barriers to providing feedback. For example, one informant described how, in some contexts in Myanmar, giving negative feedback on assistance received may be avoided so as not to "show lack of gratitude". Staff attempt to convey that the assistance provided is an entitlement; however, obtaining open and candid feedback may be difficult in such contexts, meaning that any application (and assessment) of AAP needs an awareness of culturally appropriate approaches.

Finding 1.2. AAP is deemed as having general relevance for IOM, although IN/285 is specific to emergency response contexts. ${ }^{9}$ The AAP team has effectively promoted the framework, but there is an unmet demand for translating theoretical guidelines into more practical tools and solutions. Exchange of practical experiences between various field offices.

The AAP Framework has a degree of specificity to humanitarian and emergency response operations. This was found to generate confusion about the operational scope of AAP, although AAP principles and approaches were felt to be relevant also for non-emergency contexts. Some informants suggested that the focus of the current AAP Framework could be revised to strengthen connections with the Sustainable Development Goals.

A distinction should be drawn between the AAP Framework (IN/285) and other guidance and tools available for its "operationalization" (such as the IOM AAP toolkits on participation, (2020a), on information sharing and transparency (2020b), and on CFM (2020d)). Perceptions of the Framework often differed from perceptions of the guidance and tools. Most staff interviewed during KIIs found that the Framework was helpful for defining the role of AAP and its importance for the Organization. In contrast, only half of the respondents to the global survey (Figure 3) rated the usefulness of AAP guidance and tools as very high (17\%) or high (29\%). Informants often felt that, while IN/285 effectively frames AAP, the tools provided and guidance available for the actual implementation of AAP approaches were not as practical as they should be.

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{9}$ It should be noted that, since 2024, AAP has gained formal relevance across all IOM programming as its oversight was shifted from the Department of Emergencies to the Protection Division. These developments took place during the evaluation period and could not be fully reflected in the findings, but they are relevant to their interpretation.