Data gathered for this case study suggest clearly that actions were being taken within IOM Ethiopia to ensure the representation of people with disabilities in various settings, including their active involvement in community and camp committees. This was perceived as a positive development, with consequences such as more effective service provision and more accessible camp infrastructure. Additionally, the integration of disability-related considerations into monitoring tools was ongoing, reflecting a commitment to strengthening inclusiveness and responsiveness. However, as visible disabilities were perceived as receiving relatively more attention, challenges were acknowledged in addressing less visible forms of disability. For instance, at the time of data collection, there were no operational mechanisms for information sharing for people with a hearing impairment, including no CFM adapted for the hearing impaired. Hotline services, in particular, may be impractical for individuals with such disabilities. Intellectual disabilities were also mentioned as something to be considered in relation to increasing the accessibility of communication material and CFMs.

##### Coherence and Integration  ... page 46

###### Coherence and coordination within IOM ... page 46

Consultations held as part of this case study suggest that IOM Ethiopia has been implementing AAP approaches for some time, although not always labelling these initiatives as AAP. For example, engaging members of affected communities through the establishment of camp committees or through information sharing was a common feature in different interventions even before the formalization of AAP approaches within the country office.

The adoption of the comprehensive AAP Framework in IOM Ethiopia sought to formalize and systematize the various ongoing AAP-related initiatives, and also to increase their effectiveness. An example is the collection and processing of complaints and feedback, which was initially conducted with different solutions and approaches by different units or projects. The Zite Manager application was developed specifically for harmonizing complaints and feedback collection practices within CCCM functions, by providing a single solution. This application was perceived as having significantly enhanced the efficiency and effectiveness of these processes.

To ensure coherence across programmes, IOM Ethiopia mandated training on AAP and PSEAH for all staff. ${ }^{27}$ Collaborative training by PSEAH officers and the AAP teams avoids misconceptions about separate CFM systems. The handling of PSEAH-related reports follows specific procedures, and all IOM staff with whom a PSEAH-related allegation is shared, including hotline operators, are expected to report these directly on the institutional We Are All In reporting platform, regardless of how the report was made in the first place (whether directly to the staff member or through an available CFM). In the context of IOM Ethiopia, AAP focal persons follow-up on non-sensitive complaints and focus on the formulation of feedback related to programmes for IOM and partners. In IOM Ethiopia suboffices, AAP focal persons often also serve as PSEAH focal persons, potentially strengthening linkages between the two domains.

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{27}$ This differs from global institutional practice, where AAP training is not mandatory.