direct experience and the availability of dedicated support were also seen as key to real internalization. At the time of the consultations, AAP training courses targeting staff in suboffices were ongoing.

The toll-free hotline service - a "milestone" achievement according to some informants - was generally perceived as fundamental to IOM Ethiopia's core programming and as being effectively maintained. However, some informants pointed to the risk of reducing AAP to mere CFM management, remarking how relying solely on the hotline is insufficient to follow AAP principles in a broader sense.

AAP indicators have been integrated into monitoring and evaluation tools and activities, and the DTM surveys, to facilitate regular monitoring and assessment processes. However, there is no dedicated theory of change for AAP, nor a consolidated and comprehensive monitoring framework. Additionally, as mentioned already, some informants lamented the absence of "deeper" assessments into the quality and effectiveness of AAP-related activities.

Most of the mainstreaming efforts are managed by focal persons at different levels. Responsibilities associated with AAP in most cases are not considered as part of the main role and responsibilities of such focal persons. No evidence was found regarding whether assuming AAP-related responsibilities is recorded in formal documents such as the terms of reference of the staff member's position.

#### Lessons learned  ... page 51

The integration of AAP indicators in data collection processes, particularly regarding community preferences with regard to information channels, participation modalities and CFMs, has proven to be very effective in advocating for resource allocation to AAP and demonstrating the need to fine-tune AAP activities based on the context. Indeed, these data in Ethiopia have shown that preferences and practices vary widely from region to region, with significant differences in terms of preferred language, medium, community structures for accountability, trust in international organizations, government officials or other stakeholders, and so on. This integration has informed IOM approaches but has also contributed to ensuring that the IAAWG strategic plan for 2024 was informed by this evidence.

While AAP capacity was initially centralized in the Ethiopia Country Office in Addis Ababa, efforts to train frontline and suboffice staff since 2023 have contributed to creating a common understanding of AAP across the different operations of IOM. These efforts have also led to increases in the perceived value of AAP activities performed by programme staff, as well as to more frequent solicitation for AAP-related support (for example, to conduct assessments, facilitate stakeholder or community trainings, or set up CFM desks during distributions). AAP focal persons in IOM Ethiopia suboffices play a key role in meeting the growing demand for AAP-related support.

AAP assessments show that beneficiaries often seek information or raise complaints to security or cleaning staff in offices or migrant centres, as they are often easier to approach. The AAP-oriented trainings targeting these staff categories specifically were greatly appreciated.