## 3. CONCLUSIONS  ... page 34

The 2023 MOPAN assessment of IOM concluded that, with regard to AAP, IOM has not yet been able to consistently incorporate AAP across all its programmes, and did not invest adequately in AAP, considering the scale of its operations. ${ }^{24}$ Overall, this evaluation confirms these MOPAN conclusions. As well, it identifies areas where considerable progress has been made or is being made, mainly thanks to the dedication of an undersized central AAP unit, and that of several staffers in country offices who most often undertake AAP initiatives with project-specific funding.

The IOM AAP Framework is relevant to the mission of the Organization and consistent with the United Nations system and with IASC policies. The desk review and consultations held confirmed that the IOM AAP approach considers the cross-cutting issues of human rights, gender equality and disability, though it does not address environmental issues well (or at all). IN/285 was developed in consultation with various stakeholders and through a thorough review of previous organizational frameworks to ensure internal consistency. As a result, IN/285 is formally consistent with other relevant IOM policies and guidelines. However, at the operational level, where field staff have to consider multiple policies and organizational priorities, the interlinkages between AAP and other frameworks (such as data protection, for example) are not always explicitly addressed, due to a perceived lack of available guidance, tools and support that address such links. To extend the example of data protection, the practical resources (such as a template for data-sharing agreements) and support are lacking that would be required to ensure that AAP activities oriented towards collective accountability (which sometimes entail sharing the personal data of affected persons, for instance) are undertaken in accordance with data protection principles and standards.

The provision of appropriate guidance and tools for practical AAP implementation is an essential aspect that this evaluation considered. Informants overwhelmingly found that IN/285 was valuable in steering IOM efforts in AAP and appreciated the training sessions offered by IOM Headquarters to improve awareness of these requirements (IN/285 established the mandatory nature of AAP in IOM). At the same time, some informants voiced doubts about the practical implications of the mandatory nature of AAP, and about whether IN/285 applied to non-emergency response operations (since IN/285 does indeed focus on emergency response operations). Overall, the data gathered are clear in indicating that there is an unmet demand for learning, for a clearer integration of AAP into the IOM project cycle, for more "standard" tools (especially in the area of CFM) and for closer support in implementing AAP activities, as these take place in diverse and sometimes challenging operational contexts that might require tailor-made solutions. It is also clear from the desk review conducted for this evaluation that AAP activities have very limited internal and external visibility, ultimately both affecting the perception of their relevance and limiting awareness of them.

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{24}$ MOPAN (2023): "the assessment found that AAP is still only partially integrated into country strategies, programme designs and partnership agreements, and reporting on AAP activities is not systematic... Given the complexity of IOM's operations, there is still some way to go to institutionalise AAP across the organisation" (47).