the selection of pilot countries for exchanges of practices. However, this evaluation found that good practices in the field of AAP were not being identified and disseminated systematically. AAP activities and solutions remain, to a large extent, implemented in isolation, leading to missed opportunities to upscale or synergize with the initiatives of other projects, units or offices.

Finding 1.3 The role of AAP in promoting cross-cutting themes is considered in the AAP Framework, with practical applications on the ground. The relevance of AAP for environmental sustainability is, however, not considered.

The IOM AAP Framework integrates diversity inclusion principles, focusing on vulnerable and marginalized groups, encompassing human rights, gender equality, and disability. IOM staff informants understood and highlighted the importance of AAP for promoting diversity inclusion. The framework specifies groups such as women, children, LGBTQIA+ individuals, the elderly, people with disabilities and ethnic and religious minorities, among others. During field visits in Türkiye and Ethiopia, particular attention was found to be given to women and individuals with disabilities in different AAP initiatives. More generally, the data gathered suggest that IOM employs multiple mechanisms to engage vulnerable populations, offering guidance on reaching out to the most excluded and amplifying the voices of women, youth and other traditionally marginalized groups.

Numerous instances were identified where women's specific needs were addressed and individuals with disabilities were included in focus group discussions and other consultation methods. However, environment-related inputs are not included in IN/285; further, AAP activities carried out in country offices that were observed or reviewed did not seem to consider the role of AAP in promoting environmental sustainability.

Finding 1.4 The "operational" nature of IOM, and its direct interaction with affected people, give it a comparative advantage in the implementation of AAP initiatives. However, the contribution of IOM to AAP has limited visibility.

Considering that AAP is a responsibility of the humanitarian and development sector as a whole rather than of single or specific organizations, some evaluation questions asked respondents to explore how IOM contributes to the advancement of AAP from a sectorial and collective perspective. Having a "local focus" and being a "frontline" actor were the most frequently indicated comparative advantages of IOM.

Several informants highlighted the potential of IOM to drive significant advancements in the AAP collective space and to foster "collective accountability". ${ }^{11}$ The Ethiopia case study (Case study 1) illustrates the work done by IOM in this country to provide a platform for the analysis and dissemination of AAP data shared by different actors. However, some informants

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{11}$ As noted in the IOM APP Framework (IOM, 2020c2), "There is no commonly agreed-upon definition of collective accountability." However, as that document explains, the term is often used in the context of AAP discussions to indicate that "multiple humanitarian actors are engaged in joint programming, provide common services and pursue collective outcomes", and that therefore "[a]ll actors involved in such joint efforts are required to ensure AAP obligations and commitments are upheld". For more, see Finding 2.2 below. In the context of this evaluation, "collective accountability" broadly refers to how AAP should be undertaken jointly by different organizations present in a given operational context, to the extent they are all collectively accountable for their interventions (and the coordination between those interventions) among affected people.