Protection, PSEAH, and AAP when interacting with vulnerable groups." Ultimately, many informants attributed these challenges to the "projectized" nature of IOM, where individual initiatives proceed in a more or less autonomous manner.

Informants located in field offices also noted that different policies and thematic initiatives in IOM are, de facto, in competition with each other, as the resources and staff time available for their implementation may often be severely constrained. More or less deliberate trade-offs have to be made concerning different policies, noting also how support coming from IOM Headquarters is generally specific to a single initiative or theme, ignoring the interrelationships with other frameworks.

A lack of coherence between AAP and the Data Protection Policy was mentioned by informants: obstacles to sharing AAP data (because such data include personal information) were noted in some cases, and a lack of support for the definition of data sharing agreements was noted in others. While the merit of these perceptions could not be verified as a technical analysis of the coherence between the AAP Framework and the Data Protection Policy goes beyond the scope of this evaluation, this instance is presented as an example of frameworks that may not have been fully coordinated in their development and in their implementation, for the further consideration of technical experts in IOM.

Finding 2.2. There are instances where IOM promoted or supported collective accountability through its AAP initiatives, but there are also instances where coordination or collaboration with other actors was lacking. "Collective accountability" emerged as a central theme in the narrations of the informants and is an area where there may be an unmet demand for additional guidance, support and monitoring.

In Ethiopia, a joint platform exists where United Nations agencies and various organizations involved in the AAP working group can input data for shared use amidst the ongoing crisis. In this context, the IOM Ethiopia Chief of Mission provided direct reports to the United Nations Country Team on the feedback from affected people (see Case study 1). An additional significant case shared was the Response for Venezuela coordination platform, created by the Office of the Special Envoy for the Venezuela Response, with IOM acting as inter-agency AAP coordinator since 2021. According to IOM informants, the platform was crucial in orchestrating efforts across South America to assist Venezuelan migrants. In both examples, unified platforms were created for agencies to use AAP data collectively and conduct shared initiatives (such as AAP-related training courses), with perceived benefits to coherence and efficiency.

At the same time, informants also indicated the presence of significant obstacles and missed opportunities related to collaboration with other United Nations agencies and other organizations in terms of AAP. Almost all informants based in field locations that were consulted for this evaluation mentioned how, very often, feedback collected through CFMs cannot be fully acted upon by IOM alone, lamenting also the lack of a collective accountability approach by which different humanitarian and development actors could provide a coordinated and consolidated response to the issues raised. Informants noted that the fragmentation of AAP systems (across separate organizations) sometimes means that multiple