Finding 3.4. The institutional framework for monitoring the implementation of AAP policy is basic and predominantly focuses on outputs rather than outcomes and impacts. The IOM SRF (2024) is commendable in that it shifts its focus towards outcomes, including service and programme satisfaction revised according to feedback from affected people, but there is still a need for a specific and comprehensive monitoring framework for AAP.

The monitoring of AAP in IOM is based on indicators included in other institutional monitoring tools rather than having its own dedicated logical framework based on a clear theory of change. The indicators used show that the focus of monitoring activities is predominantly on outputs, with targets not clearly defined and with an unclear distinction between outputs, outcomes and impacts, or objectives.

In the IOM Strategic Plan 2024-2028 and the IOM SRF, new AAP indicators have been included (see Annex C) that can enhance reflection on the tangible benefits of AAP. Concerning the identification of good practices, some informants in field offices expressed uncertainty on how "success stories" were identified by IOM Headquarters.

Finding 3.5. Engagement with and awareness of AAP among senior or leadership officers is unequal, with officers in field offices being more committed to AAP than those in central functions.

Several IOM officers consulted believed that senior leadership was somewhat disengaged from AAP or only marginally attentive to it. This sentiment is also reflected by the resources allocated to AAP activities at the central level, which several informants considered to be inadequate. ${ }^{14}$ The limited investment of core funding in AAP - with, at the time of this evaluation, the AAP Coordination Unit primarily being staffed by consultants funded by a specific USAID Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance initiative - is perceived as a sign that implementing AAP is not a top priority for IOM.

Senior staff consulted in field offices generally appeared to be engaged with and aware of AAP. In the IOM Ethiopia Country Office, for instance, AAP was addressed at the highest organizational level, enabling the appointment of AAP focal points for all suboffices, setting up mechanisms to share data with external partners, and holding discussions with the United Nations Country Team (see Case study 1). Conversely, the engagement of leadership at the headquarters level seemed to be confined to the initial stages, during the design and launch of the AAP Framework. This evaluation attempted to consult senior IOM Headquarters officers on this matter, but interviews did not take place due to the unavailability of the individuals contacted. ${ }^{15}$

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{14}$ This finding, gathered in 2024, backs up the 2023 MOPAN analysis regarding AAP, which concluded that IOM had not yet been able to consistently incorporate AAP across all its programmes and did not invest adequately in AAP, considering the scale of its operations.
    ${ }^{15}$ The unavailability of senior IOM Headquarters staff to be interviewed for this evaluation was interpreted as a sign of limited engagement on the matter.