level, where only one office (Ethiopia; see Case study 1) was known to have devised a system by which AAP activities are undertaken through an office-wide approach (rather than being project specific) and funded proportionally by all relevant projects.

The scarcity of resources allocated to AAP might have created strong incentives for their efficient utilization, especially at the central level. However, some findings point at how the "fragmented" funding approach based on individual projects (and the uncertainties that come with that) may be creating inefficiencies, especially in terms of duplication when developing and managing CFMs (a domain of AAP on which an urgent need for institutional guidance and resources was often voiced). These narratives stress the importance of greater communication and collaboration on AAP between different projects, technical areas and implementing units, establishing wherever there are possible office-wide approaches to AAP.

Assessing the impact of AAP initiatives goes beyond the scope of this evaluation and its methodological design. It is, however, hoped that these findings might help identify cases that can be the subject of robust impact assessments in the future.

The release of IN/285 was a milestone achievement for IOM engagement with AAP. By providing a legal foundation for the IOM commitment to AAP, this document is one of the pillars for the sustainability of IOM AAP engagement. Active participation in the IASC on AAP was largely perceived to have brought benefits in terms of resource mobilization and awareness, leading to the conclusion that this engagement should not dwindle. Moreover, there are clear signs that AAP principles and values are penetrating IOM "corporate culture", with more and more staff understanding the need for and advantages of accountability, including important aspects of it such as meaningful community engagement and robust CFMs. Conversely, uneven support for AAP among the senior management of the Organization (with a gap noted in IOM Headquarters leadership), the inadequate resources allocated to AAP, as well as the absence of a clear strategic approach to AAP funding and implementation (at both central and country office levels), all cast a shadow over the sustainability of AAP, with the risk of increasing perceptions that IOM commitments on this matter remain more aspirational than real.