The notion of "accountability" in AAP should always be seen as collective, in the sense that the whole humanitarian and development system should be accountable to the affected people they are supposed to serve, rather than each single organization holding that accountability individually. All actors operating in a specific context should work in concert to achieve common goals and complement each other, based on their respective roles and capabilities, and that requires collective accountability. ${ }^{25}$ In this evaluation, collective accountability emerged as a frequent and important concept in the narration of many informants. Instances were described in which IOM established effective communication and coordination with other United Nations agencies and partners (for example, for the joint collection, analysis and dissemination of CFM or needs data) to promote collective accountability. In other cases, scenarios of limited inter-agency communication and collaboration on AAP were described, sometimes producing cumbersome or uncertain referrals, and sometimes making it impossible to properly address reasonable needs voiced by affected people, as these did not fall within the IOM operational sphere.

Many examples of operational changes and adaptations that were based on feedback received from affected people were gathered as part of this evaluation, suggesting that AAP initiatives have some effectiveness in informing operations. At the same time, some findings point at the need to structure or strengthen the processes that translate feedback into meaningful operational adjustments (in a timely manner), and several informants perceived that not all data gathered from affected people were being used.

At an aggregate level, more and more AAP engagement is taking place in IOM, as confirmed by both the prevalent perceptions of informants and by the fact that indicators used to monitor AAP in IOM are generally recording substantial improvements. It is, however, doubtful whether the current level of AAP engagement is commensurate to the size of IOM operations. Moreover, IOM does not have a formal result matrix or a theory of change for AAP; rather, it relies on a collection of indicators from different institutional monitoring frameworks, mostly focusing on outputs and on broadly defined outcomes, which makes it hard to usefully assess the implementation of AAP. Overall progress still seems insufficient to support claims of AAP mainstreaming within the Organization.

The opinion that resources allocated to AAP in IOM are inadequate was prevalent in both qualitative and quantitative data gathered for this evaluation. The work that led to IN/285 was funded by donors on the basis of a specific initiative. The size of the central AAP unit in IOM Headquarters was generally deemed insufficient to proactively engage with technical support, capacity-building activities including training and programme and policy development. In country offices, AAP initiatives are most often funded by and within specific projects, with their scope tailored to the requirements of the funding initiative. Some informants doubted that IOM has a strategic approach to the funding of AAP, neither at the central nor at the country

[^0]
[^0]:    ${ }^{25}$ Some informants pointed out the fact that collective accountability applies not only to the organizations intervening in a certain operational context, but also to their donors. According to one informant, donors sometimes push for the integration of AAP into the initiatives they fund, but then are not necessarily equipped or willing to make adjustments to their funding allocations when these would be required to follow-up on feedback received from affected people. The role of donors was not sufficiently explored in this evaluation to formulate specific findings and recommendations on this issue. It is, however, hoped that this aspect will be explored in future evaluative work.