2. Strengthen community-based reintegration efforts to address drivers of irregular migration and provide economic opportunities that reduce the necessity to migrate.

The current evaluation has demonstrated the great importance of CBR projects as a component of the integrated approach. However, gaps were found in the design, M\&E, and relevance of some of the projects. Therefore, migrant protection, return and reintegration programming should be focused on enhancing the quality of the CBR projects in relation to the needs of the community members. Possibly, this may require larger-scale projects by a smaller sample of Implementing Partners, to ensure IOM can keep a better oversight of the project design, needs analysis and implementation.

Additionally, the CBR projects are an important occasion to ensure the involvement of local authorities. In line with Recommendation 1, IOM should continue focusing on enhancing ownership by local authorities through their increased engagement in CBR projects.

#### 3. Increase attention on building partnerships with service providers who can function without (significant) funding channelled by IOM.  ... page 29

The use of service providers not funded under the JI has multiple benefits to strengthen the work done under the JI. Namely, it can contribute to the capacity of service providers to support returnees; it contributes to the development and strengthening of referral systems; it contributes to policies on social security, insurance, and budgeting for service provisions; and finally, it reduces the costs of IOM. Therefore, capacity building of such existing service providers, who can function without significant financial support, can be a crucial element contributing to long-term impact and sustainability.

To continue strengthening partnerships, the IOM should also explore complementarity with other organisations which are focused on strengthening service provision. Namely, there is a need not only to strengthen partnerships and referrals but also to strengthen the quality of service provision in general (e.g. considering the lack of psychiatrists in Djibouti and lack of attention to mental health in most countries). Current efforts to build referral systems are not sustainable unless the service providers are able to function effectively themselves.
4. Explore opportunities for the continued (co-)funding of key, effective, and relevant activities in line with those supported under the JI-HOA. These activities include direct and specialized assistance in transit, including AVR assistance for migrants along all key migration routes from the HOA (including the Eastern, Southern, and Northern Route), an integrated approach to reintegration (individual reintegration support, CBR projects, structural level interventions) as well as support to the Regional Data Hub.

The work of IOM in countries of transit and destination has been noted as most relevant and important, as it directly involves the saving of lives. Therefore, the continuation of AVR support to migrants is directly linked to rescue and protection. A termination of this component, even if partial to specific migration routes, has detrimental consequences for migrants.

The evaluation found that the community-level approach to reintegration has been crucial for the achievements of the JI-HoA, both as standalone activities to enhance livelihoods, but also as integral component of the Integrated Approach. The effectiveness of the CBR projects to support reintegration and address drivers of irregular migration has been underlined and substantiated in this evaluation. Additionally, the evaluation found that the integrated approach itself is of great importance to link all